MARINe Photoplot Layering App: Scoring Guidelines
1.	See photoplot_app_instructions.pdf for how to enter data using app 
2.	The app records data by column, so always start at the upper left most point and work down. Tell the recorder when you begin a new column.
3.	Record the species code for the top-most organism/substrate (see rules below for weedy species and cases where there are >2 layers).
4.	Record the species code for the bottom-most organism/substrate. If there is only a single layer (e.g. "Balanus"), or the same species occurs in the top-most and bottom-most layers (e.g. "Fucus" canopy over "Fucus" holdfast), then you will have “NONE” as your bottom layer. 
5.	Only record rock under a species if you can actually see it. For example Fucus on rock is ok (as long as you don’t hit a holdfast), but Tetraclita on rock is just recorded as “TETRUB on NONE.”
6.	If there are >2 layers, record only the uppermost BIOLOGICAL layer (not ephemeral) and lowermost TARGET species; if no target species are present, record the uppermost and lowermost BIOLOGICAL layer. Some examples to illustrate how to record data for points with >2 layers:
a.	Fucus on Chthamalus on Mytilus, record top layer=Fucus and bottom layer=Mytilus. 
b.	Soranthera on Neorhodomela on sand, record top layer=Soranthera, bottom layer=Neorhodomela)
c.	Dead Chthamalus on Semibalanus on Mytilus, record top layer=Semibalanus, bottom layer=Mytilus. Dead barnacles are considered “substrate”, see #8.
d.	Ulva on Fucus on Balanus, record top layer=Fucus, bottom layer=Balanus.
e.	Gastroclonium over Endocladia over Chthamalus, record top layer=Gastroclonium, bottom layer=Chthamalus.
7.	Do not score mobile invertebrates (e.g. Tegula, Mexacanthina). Instead, score the organism/substrate underneath them.
8.	Score sedentary motile invertebrates (any invert that can’t be easily moved) occurring under a point as one of the following core categories: chiton, Lottia gigantea, limpet, Pisaster ochraceus, or other invertebrate. 
a.	Optional: ID non-core sedentary invertebrates to species (e.g. S. purpuratus) using designated codes
9.	Score bleached crustose corallines (appearing white) as “crustose corallines”, not “rock”. Bleached crustose corallines may still be alive, so assume they are live and score as such.
10.	Score obviously dead barnacle tests, dead mollusk shells, and other non-living substrates that are not “rock”, “sand” or “tar” as “other substrates”. 
a.	Optional: score each dead barnacle/mollusk species separately in the field using designated codes. 
11.	Epoxy corner markers and bolts should be scored as “rock”.
12.	When sand is present under a point in the photo, if you can positively identify what is under the sand, then score the underlying core species or substrate; otherwise score as “sand”. This means that “sand” will be scored whenever sand thickness is greater than just a thin layer with patches of rock or some core species showing through.
